alexgilleran.com should probably be familiar to you as the website that you're currently on. It's here as my presence on the internet and a portfolio of sorts, but mainly it's been my sandbox for playing around with the newer web technologies of the last couple of years - HTML5, CSS3 and Backbone.js... hence the gratuitous use of transparancies, box-shadows and AJAX that you see everywhere.

I've had the alexgilleran.com domain for a while, mainly because being the unbearable narcicist that I am, I love being able to give people email addresses that end in "alexgilleran.com". For quite a while, if you typed the corresponding http://alexgilleran.com into your browser, you'd get a white page with a single `<marquee>` tag (my favourite of all time) stating "INFORMATION SUPERHIGHWAY!!!" in big red letters. In playing around with my web server I accidentally changed alexgilleran.com to an empty apache directory listing, and didn't have the heart to change it back.

However, after I came back from my big trip around Europe I had a lot of time free and thought it'd be a good idea to polish up my web development skills, the way that only making something by yourself can really accomplish. And this, as you can see, was the result. The page, silly as it sounds, isn't really intended to be intuitive or user friendly - think of it more like a concept car - it's not really about the end result so much as what I learned along the way. The way that it looks is also supposed to reflect me, in a way. It's inspired by Windows Phone 7/8 - because I think it's gorgeous - and by Star Trek's (decidedly less gorgeous in a 2010s context) LCARS interfaces - because I'm a huge nerd.

The site isn't really about the visual though, more about the technical... when I started to learn HTML around 1996, having a single-page site with no back-end at all was perfectly reasonable. Then came CGI, PHP, ASP, and a raft of later server-side technologies, and having a side without a back-end and without a database was comically ridiculous. Now, as Javascript comes more and more into vogue, HTML5 opens up what we can do with browsers and REST APIs become more and more ubiquitous, having a single-page HTML site is suddenly cutting edge again... although in a way that no one imagined in the 1990s. I haven't built a web application without some kind of server-side framework since the 90s myself, and I wanted to give it a go.

And so this was what transpired - there's no back-end at all (although I hope to build a separate one to power the blog later) - everything is done on the client-side with javascript. Cross-domain AJAX is used to retrieve news items from Twitter and Github, and all content (e.g. this paragraph) is specified in Markdown files that are dynamically pulled off the server via Ajax, formatted client-side and displayed on the page. The design's fully responsive (minimise the browser window and start resizing it, it's fun!). Backbone is used to tie everything together - for instance, clicking on one of the buttons on the left submits a request to the backbone router, which then calls up the model of the site and sets a different page to 'open' - this triggers an event which is caught by the views, which then refresh themselves.

It's been great fun building the site - as someone who's mainly worked in the back-end and always dreaded Javascript, I'm impressed by how much libraries like RequireJS, Backbone and jQuery have added to it... and I'm even at peace with the idea of it on the server side now. The future of the web is bright indeed.