IceSoap is a library that adds the ability to consume SOAP web services to all versions of Android. It came about around 2011 as I was trying to design a generic Websphere Commerce app in my spare time. The only web API it exposed at the time was SOAP-based, and even for SOAP it was complicated, clearly having been designed for consumption by an ESB rather than a little mobile application.

The dominant solution for SOAP in Android was and remains KSoap - a lightweight SOAP library that's based on Java 1.3 (I can't live without generics) and didn't really seem to me that much easier than just POSTing a SOAP envelope to the server manually... so that was what I did. As I wrote custom envelope builders and dealt with the pain of building parsers with XMLPullParser, I started to get a bit frustrated. It'd be so much easier if the web service was just REST + JSON... why couldn't I just create custom classes to map directly to the XML responses, like GSON can for JSON?

Why not indeed?

So I embarked upon creating a general-purpose parser that would traverse through the document, keeping track of the XPath of the current element and checking it against a map of fields that were annotated with the XPath of the XML element they corresponded with. Having got the parsing to work, I added a simple API for building up SOAP requests (something that I found needlessly difficult in KSoap) and made it asynchronous using Android AsyncTasks.

Around this time Websphere Commerce Feature Pack 4 came out, including REST services and a finished generic Android app to connect to them. I was proud of my creation though - not so much the app itself as the SOAP layer, which nearly all the effort had gone into. I figured it could help someone else, so I separated the SOAP code out of the app, put it on Google Code and started working on it in isolation. Having never really contributed to Open Source before, I wasn't sure anyone would be interested at all... until I found that someone had sent me a bug report, even before I'd bothered releasing a .jar. Guess there was interest. And bugs :(.

From there I wrote up a proper wiki, neatened up the APIs and published the whole thing on Maven central. It's not as popular as I'd like, but it's taught me a lot about programming. Designing APIs for developers you'll never meet or indeed hear from teaches you a lot about keeping things simple and writing decent documentation. The great thing about open source is you code like everyone in the world is watching, which really forces you to keep to a good style and write those javadocs. I've learnt a great deal from IceSoap, and it's been incredibly rewarding hearing from various developers around the world who it's helped. 